When you take a normal step,
the first part of your foot
to touch the ground is your heel.
Your weight is then transferred
to the long bones of the foot,
or metatarsals.
The foot rolls from the outside
inwards, or pronates,
to distribute the weight across the bones.
It starts at the back
of the outside metatarsal,
moves to the front of the
inside metatarsal,
and ends with a push-off
from the big toe.
Neutral pronation
means that weight is distributed
evenly as the foot rolls inwards.
Some people are overpronators.
This means the foot rolls too far inwards
as weight is transferred from the heel
to the metatarsals to the big toe,
and distributed unevenly with
too much weight on the big toe.
Sometimes the arches collapse
or the ankle rolls inwards.
People can also be underpronators.
This means the foot does not roll in
enough as weight moves
from the heel to the long bones,
with too much weight being borne
on the outside of the foot.